---
title: "React Study: useEffect"
---

### Schedule

  - **Study the suggested material**
  - **Practice on the topics and share your questions**

### Study Plan

  The plan for today and tomorrow is to study the following article by `Dan Abramov*`:

  - [**A Complete Guide to useEffect**](https://overreacted.io/a-complete-guide-to-useeffect/){:target="_blank"}

  This is a long, lengthy article that goes into deep details about the `useEffect` Hook and the Components' lifecycle. 

  It is highly recommended that you read the full article as it provides some very important concepts and rules that you must know if you want to master `React`. That's why we split this task in two days. 

  Here are some of the main points covered in the the article:

  - How do I replicate `componentDidMount**` with useEffect?
  - How do I correctly fetch data inside useEffect? What is []?
  - Do I need to specify functions as effect dependencies or not?
  - Why do I sometimes get an infinite refetching loop?
  - Why do I sometimes get an old state or prop value inside my effect?

  Make sure to open up all the `Codesandbox` demos provided in the article and study and experiment with the code.

  *_(Dan Abramov is a core contributor to React and the creator of Redux)_
  
  **_(componentDidMount is a special lifecycle method used in Class Components that gets called when the component has been mounted. More about Class Components and `componentDidMount` [here](https://react.dev/reference/react/Component){:target="_blank"})_

### Summary

### Exercises

### Extra Resources
