---
title: "Media API"
---

### Schedule

  - **Watch the lectures**
  - **Study the suggested material**
  - **Practice on the topics and share your questions**

### Study Plan

  Your instructor will share the video lectures with you. Here are the topics covered:

  - **Part 1:** Local Storage & Media Web APIs
  - **Part 2:** Media Web API

  Key points:

  - Understand the basics of local storage and its limitations.
  - Learn how to use the media API to control video and audio elements.
  - Use custom HTML and CSS to create a unique interface for video playback.
  - Take advantage of the media API's methods and properties to enhance user experience.
  - Don't rely solely on local storage; consider using server-side storage solutions for more complex applications.

  You can find the lecture code [here](https://github.com/in-tech-gration/WDX-180/blob/main/curriculum/week25/assets/day05/code/media.html){:target="_blank"} and the diagrams [here](https://github.com/in-tech-gration/WDX-180/blob/main/curriculum/week25/assets/day05/diagram.png){:target="_blank"}.

  **Questions:**

  - What about iframe-embedded videos or audio, e.g. Vimeo, YouTube?  
    - In this case you have to use the Vimeo/YouTube/\* APIs.  
    - The Media API is **only available** for `<video>` and `<audio>` directly accessible through the web page. **The Media API won’t work with `<iframe>`**.

  **References & Resources:**

  - [**Slides**](https://kostasx.github.io/EventLoop/frontend/html5/apis.html#/2/10){:target="_blank"}  
  - [**The `<video>` element**](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/video){:target="_blank"}  
  - [**HTMLMediaElement**](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/HTMLMediaElement){:target="_blank"} **Interface**  
  - **iframe vs video/audio:**  
    - `<video>` and `<audio>` are HTML elements to play a video or audio file  
      - You are loading a video or audio file(s)  
    - `<iframe>` is an HTML element to load a while web page  
      - You are loading basically an HTML file through a URL.  
  - **What makes https secure?**  
    - It’s **not** the port (443) but the other technologies\* that are working alongside the port and the server. *SSL/TLS.  
  - [MIME Types](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Basics_of_HTTP/MIME_types){:target="_blank"}: *"A media type (also known as a Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions or MIME type) is a standard that indicates the nature and format of a document, file, or assortment of bytes."*  
  - How to change LiveServer port: search in settings for: **"liveServer.settings.port"**  
    - **settings.json:**

    ```json
      {
        "settings": {
          "liveServer.settings.port": 5555
        }
      }
    ```

### Summary

### Exercises

### Extra Resources