---
title: "Mini CMS: Database Connection"
---

### Schedule

  - **Practice on the topics and share your questions**

### Study Plan

  Let's practice! Skip to the `Exercises` section below for 
  a guide on what to code today.

### Summary

### Exercises

  Take this opportunity and try to work on the CMS project (you can find the code to start from [here](https://github.com/in-tech-gration/WDX-180/tree/main/curriculum/modules/javascript/misc/_w34d05/assets){:target="_blank"}) to accomplish the following tasks:

  - Create a new `src/db/basic.ts` file and paste the official `sqlite3` example found here: [https://github.com/TryGhost/node-sqlite3?tab=readme-ov-file#usage](https://github.com/TryGhost/node-sqlite3?tab=readme-ov-file#usage){:target="_blank"}. We'll just keep the other database-related files aside for now.

  - Instead of creating a sample `lorem` table, like the example, update the code and create 2 tables that will hold our CMS `Users` and their Blog `Posts`. Make sure that these two tables have a one-to-many relation, where one `User` can create many `Posts`. Make use of the `Primary/Foreign Keys` to connect the two tables and populate then with a few sample users and posts. ChatGPT can help you come up with some sample user names, blog post titles and sample content.

  - Think carefully about the Schema of these two tables (column names and value types).

  - Rename `src/index.ts` to `src/web.ts` and create a new file named `src/index.ts`. Find a way to import both the `src/db/basic.ts` and `src/web.ts` into `src/index.ts` and "wire" them up correctly so that the web server starts listening when the database has been initialized and the table creation (CREATE TABLE) and population (INSERT INTO) have completed. You will have to create some functions and of course make use of some callbacks in order to achieve that. 

  - Create another route named `/blog` that will read the contents of the `Posts` table and send the contents back to the user in the form of an HTML page.

  Here is some code to get you started:

  index.mjs:

  ```js
  import webInit from "./web.mjs";
  import dbInit from "./db.mjs";

  dbInit( webInit );
  ```

  web.mjs:

  ```js
  export default function webInit(db){
    console.log("Web server initialized!");
    function listen(){
      console.log("Table:", db);
    }
    listen();
  }
  ```
    
  db.mjs

  ```js
  export default function dbInit(cb){
    console.log("Database server initialized!");
    setTimeout(()=>{
      console.log("Table ready!");
      cb({ table: "Users" });
    },500);
  }
  ```

  Run: `node index.mjs`

  Output:

  ```
  Database server initialized!
  Table ready!
  Web server initialized!
  Table: { table: 'Users' }
  ```

  That's it!

### Extra Resources
