---
title: "Object Creators"
---

### Schedule

  - **Watch the lectures**
  - **Study the suggested material**
  - **Practice on the topics and share your questions**

### Study Plan

  Your instructor will share the video lectures with you. Here are the topics covered:

  - Objects, Object.freeze, Object Creators

  You can find the lecture code [here](https://github.com/in-tech-gration/WDX-180/tree/main/curriculum/week16/assets/code/day03){:target="_blank"}

  **Takeaways:** 
  
  - Treat all function parameters as read-only values.
  - Understand the difference between `copied values` and `references`.

  **Suggested material for study & practice:**

  - Check the [Event Listeners on the DevTools](https://umaar.com/dev-tips/24-view-event-listeners/){:target="_blank"}  
  - Check the [getEventListeners()](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/console/utilities#getEventListeners-function){:target="_blank"}  
  - Why does the **performance.eventCounts.get("click")** show 0 at the first click?

  **References & Resources:**

  - [**Primitives**](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Primitive){:target="_blank"}  
  - [**auto-boxing behavior**](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Primitive){:target="_blank"}**:** *“Primitives have no methods but still behave as if they do. When properties are accessed on primitives, JavaScript auto-boxes the value into a wrapper object and accesses the property on that object instead.”*  
  - [**console.dir**](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/console/dir_static){:target="_blank"}  
  - [**delete**](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/delete){:target="_blank"}  
  - [**Object.freeze()**](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/freeze){:target="_blank"}

### Summary

Here's a brief summary of the main points covered:

- **Discussion on Reference vs Copy**: the difference between reference and copy when assigning values to variables in JavaScript.

<!-- - **Use of `const` keyword**: using the `const` keyword to declare variables that should not be reassigned, and how it can help avoid unexpected changes to variable values. -->

- **Example with objects and primitives**: examples with objects and primitives (like numbers) to illustrate the difference between reference and copy.

<!-- - **Understanding function calls**: understanding what value a function call returns. -->

- **Creating objects**: in JavaScript, objects can be created using the `new` keyword followed by a function name.

- **Constructor functions**: introducing the concept of constructor functions, which are special types of functions that return an object when called with the `new` keyword.

- **Using constructor functions to create objects**: The lecturer demonstrates how to use a constructor function to create multiple objects with similar properties and methods.

Some key takeaways from this lecture include:

* Using a constructor function can simplify the process of creating multiple objects with shared properties and methods.
* Constructor functions are useful when you need to create objects that have a specific structure or behavior.
* Experimenting with code examples is an important part of learning programming concepts, as it helps solidify understanding and builds familiarity.

If you're new to JavaScript or programming in general, this lecture might be helpful for getting started with the basics of object-oriented programming (OOP) concepts.

### Exercises

### Extra Resources